#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass report
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman palatino
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing other 1.5
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 2.54cm
\topmargin 2.54cm
\rightmargin 2.54cm
\bottommargin 2.54cm
\headheight 0cm
\headsep 0cm
\footskip 0cm
\secnumdepth 0
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title

\series bold
Work Term Report
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
\paragraph_spacing onehalf
Mohammed A.
 Chamma - 6379153
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

University of Ottawa
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
September 12, 2014
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset toc
LatexCommand tableofcontents

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Newpage newpage
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I spent my summer coop term at the University of Ottawa studying neuroscience
 under Professor Bela Joos.
 The term lasted four months, starting in May and ending in August.
 It was also my first time living on my own; I moved out of my home in Kanata
 and rented a room in a neighbourhood very close to the University with
 the goal of shaving off almost 2 hours spent commuting every day.
 I worked on the third-floor of Macdonald, the Physics building, in an office
 with two other students also doing research with Professor Bela.
 The environment was very relaxed and academic.
 I worked on my own laptop.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
During my time there I learned the basics of neuroscience.
 Professor Bela and I talked about a project to model an experiment where
 nerve damage is measured in an arm by electrically stimulating one area
 of the arm (like the elbow) and then measuring the propagated signal through
 the nerves at another point (like the wrist).
 In arms with damaged nerves, this signal can arrive more slowly or more
 weakly than in arms with healthy nerves.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Before I could model a bundle of damaged nerves I had to learn and understand
 how single neurons behaved.
 This meant learning the basic physiology of a neuron: about axons, myelin
 sheaths, and axon nodes.
 After that, I learned about the Hodgkin-Huxley model of an axon node, a
 mathematical model developped in the 1950s used to model voltage clamp
 experiments using a giant squid axon.
 After I could successfully model a single node, we found a paper by Donald
 Mcneal in 1976 that presented a model of axon nodes connected to each other.
 With this model we could simulate signals propagating from node to node,
 and successfully simulated results that indicated propagation.
 After that, we added a model of damage to each node of the axon.
 The model for this damage was developped by Professor Bela's group.
 With all these pieces we were able to represent a bundle of nerve fibers
 as found in an arm; we could control the length of the nerve, the size
 of each nerve and the amount of damage in each nerve.
 This model lets us simulate the experiment with different kinds of arms,
 healthy and unhealthy ones.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This report will give an overview of the concepts necessary for the building
 of the model and a look at the simulation code and how it can be used to
 produce data on the arm signal experiment with a wide variety of parameters.
 In addition some results from the model will be shown and direction for
 the future will be explored.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Neurons
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At the heart of the project is the behaviour of neurons.
 Neurons are cells capable of transmitting electrical signals.
 In human bodies they form the structure of our brains and control the movement
 of our limbs.
 In 1952 A.
 L.
 Hodgkin and A.
 F.
 Huxley measured spikes of potential in the cellular membrane of a giant
 squid axon.
 These spikes are referred to as action potentials, and are signals that
 can propagate down the length of a neuron and stimulate an adjacent neuron,
 thus transmitting the signal even further.
 Hodgkin and Huxley's innovation was in creating a mathematical model that
 attempted to explain the electrical activity of the neuron.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The neuron is composed of the cell body, dendrites, synapses, and axons.
 It is the axons that are critical in understanding the Hodgkin-Huxley model.
 Axons are long tendrils that jut out from the cell body; they are long,
 thin extensions of the cell that usually reach out to other neurons.
 The wall of the axon, the cellular membrane, is polarized.
 A concentration gradient of ions is maintained between the inside and the
 outside of the membrane so that the inside of the cell is more negatively
 charged than the outside.
 Hodgkin and Huxley initiated action potentials in the squid axon by stimulating
 it at a point with an external potential.
 They explained that when an action potential occurs, positively charged
 sodium ions would flood into the cell through a point in the membrane of
 the axon, suddenly raising the membrane potential at that point, and disturbing
 the membrane potential a little further down the axon.
 After the flood of sodium ions into the axon, potassium ions leave through
 the membrane, the flood of sodium into the axon at the inital point slows
 and eventually stops, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

resetting
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 the membrane potential of the axon at that point to its resting potential.
 Meanwhile at a point nearby on the axon, after being destabilized by it's
 neighbour, the same thing occurs and the potential spike is observed a
 little further down.
 This continues and the spike can be said to travel down the axon, and all
 the while the axon attempts to restore the concentration gradient and maintain
 a polarized potential all along the inside and outside of the cellular
 wall.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Though Hodgkin and Huxley didn't know it at the time, the concentration
 gradient is maintained by ion channels in the cellular membrane.
 These ion pumps are proteins embedded in the membrane that can selectively
 allow ions in and out of the cell, controlling ionic currents through the
 membrane.
 Without knowledge of ion channels, Hodgkin and Huxley modelled the ionic
 currents as selective permeabilities in the membrane, controlled by 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

activation
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

inactivation
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 variables that depended on the voltage of the membrane.
 These would eventually be understood as voltage-gated ion channels that
 open and close depending on the current voltage of the membrane.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Hodgkin-Huxley model is a set of four differential equations that can
 be solved in response to a stimulus for a solution of the membrane voltage.
 The model successfully produces action potentials and closely matches the
 experimental data acquired from the squid axon.
 Since then, the model has been used as the basis for more complicated models,
 and it's parameters can be tweaked for a wide variety of applications outside
 of the squid axon.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
